





































The Positive Impact of Organic Foods | Environmental Center | University of Colorado Boulder

























































Skip to Content





Environmental Center 

Main menuHome
Energy & Climate Justice
Zero Waste
Transportation
Greening CU
Sustainable Buffs


 


























Search 











Search





Enter the terms you wish to search for. 








Close











Environmental Center 


Division of Student Affairs 
Environmental Center 


Menu 













Main menu HomeEnergy & Climate JusticeZero WasteTransportationGreening CUSustainable Buffs  










Secondary Menu NewsGet Involved  














Mobile menuHome
Energy & Climate Justice
Zero Waste
Transportation
Greening CU
Sustainable Buffs
 News
Get Involved
 About Us
Donate
Staff
Jobs
 

















The Positive Impact of Organic Foods 




















                  The Positive Impact of Organic Foods                 











Published:  March 17, 2021 • By Lauren Mullen 

What does organic mean?
What are the benefits of organic foods?
Are organic foods healthier?
How do organic foods help reduce the impacts of climate change?

Read on to find the answers to these questions and more!
 









 

What does organic mean? 

USDA certified organic foods are grown and processed according to federal guidelines addressing the following factors:


Soil quality


Animal raising practices


Pest and weed control


Biologically based farming methods including regular crop rotations




Organic producers must rely on natural substances, without most conventional pesticides, bioengineering, or ionizing radiation


Animals are not given antibiotics, growth hormones, or fed animal byproducts


Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are not allowed


Only pesticides made with natural ingredients can be used








 

What are the benefits of organic foods?  

Organic farming tends to be better for the environment


Reduces pollution, conserves water, reduces soil erosion, increases soil fertility and health, and uses less energy




Healthy soil is key to growing healthy food!


Treating soil with harmful pesticides and fertilizers makes the soil dependent on these unnatural chemicals


Natural cultivation practices are far better than chemical soil management


Organic farming greatly lessens erosion


A recent study showed that an organic farm had, on average, eight more inches of topsoil than a chemically treated farm






Buying organic food fights the effects of climate change


Soil has the ability to sequester carbon (for more about this topic check out my last article Carbon Sequestration through Soil Health | Environmental Center )


Rodale’s research shows that: “If only 10,000 medium-sized farms in the U.S. converted to organic production, they would store so much carbon in the soil that it would be equivalent to taking 1,174,400 cars off the road, or reducing car miles driven by 14.62 billion miles.”




Organic farming supports water conservation and water health


American Rivers notes that water runoff from non-organic farms contains harmful pesticides, toxic fertilizers, and animal waste that is a major water pollution threat


Organic farming also creates healthy soil that does not need as much water








 

Are organic foods healthier? 

Note: labeling a food ‘organic’ does NOT necessarily mean the product is nutritious or healthy, labeling something organic is based solely on the agricultural field and/or farm practices


Studies, however, have shown that organic milk and meat can be richer in nutrients, including omega-3 fatty acids


Studies have also proven that organic produce tends to have higher levels of vitamin C, certain minerals, and antioxidants




A study done by Friends of the Earth showed that switching to an organic diet decreased levels of cancer-causing glyphosate – the main ingredient in a common pesticide – by 70% in participants’ bodies in only one week!


By avoiding conventional foods, you could be ingesting an estimated 700 fewer chemicals








 

How do organic foods help reduce the impacts of climate change? 

An organically certified farm ensures farmers are conserving biodiversity on their farm and only using approved substances without the use of synthetic chemicals


Organic foods create healthier soil that sequesters more carbon


It is estimated that global croplands have the potential to store an additional 1.85 gigatons of carbon each year. This is as much as the global transportation sector emits annually.




Buying local and organic foods is the #1 way to support the climate in our food purchasing decisions! 


Check out the local farmer’s market schedule!


Fewer transportation costs reduce carbon emissions greatly














Categories:ZW Did you know?
 




























Footer menu About UsDonateStaffJobs  

















 Subscribe to our monthly newsletter

Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Vimeo
LinkedIn
 






Environmental Center 

CUSG | Division of Student Affairs 
	University of Colorado Environmental Center
	207 UCB, UMC 355, Boulder, CO 80309-0207 
	To contact us please leave a message at 303-492-8308 or email ecenter@colorado.edu
	Office Hours Monday - Friday 9:00a-5:00p
UMC and Folsom Bike station Open/Closed status
More information about COVID-19 response and changes at CU Boulder






University of Colorado Boulder© Regents of the University of Colorado
Privacy • Legal & Trademarks • Campus Map









Return to the top of the page







